Add Android blog post answering common questions and sharing more links and info (#1249)
apple/swift-org-website: _posts/2025-11-21-exploring-the-swift-sdk-for-android.md

---
layout: new-layouts/post
published: false
date: 2025-11-21 10:00:00
title: "Exploring the Swift SDK for Android"
author: android-workgroup
category: "Developer Tools"
---

> Since the announcement of [the preview Swift SDK for Android last month](/blog/nightly-swift-sdk-for-android/),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the announcement of [the preview Swift SDK for Android](/blog/nightly-swift-sdk-for-android/),
```

---
layout: new-layouts/post
published: false
date: 2025-11-21 10:00:00
title: "Exploring the Swift SDK for Android"
author: android-workgroup
category: "Developer Tools"
---

Since the announcement of [the preview Swift SDK for Android last month](/blog/nightly-swift-sdk-for-android/),
the Android workgroup has seen a lot of questions about how it works and what's next. Please read on for those answers.

> ### Swift in the World of Android

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How Swift works on Android
```

Reviewer: Circling back, this and the additional heading revision are editorially consistent with the style of the blog. The swift.org blog uses headings as signposts that are descriptive in nature and make posts easy to scan.

Prose within sections can be adjusted to have more energy and personality, keeping in mind this particular post is on behalf of a workgroup vs an individual. If you can accept these changes, happy to review revised copy in the body to address your concern.

Swift is a natively-compiled language to machine code and Android is no different.

> That renders it on par with C and C++ code built using the Android NDK, which are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
platforms. This gives Swift similar performance to C and C++ code using the Android NDK, 
```

languages more geared towards performance, while Swift essays a happier balance between
performance, safety, and usability. To enable that, Swift apps must bundle a native
runtime for Android that implements many of its features, including its standard library and

> core libraries like Dispatch and [Foundation](/blog/foundation-preview-now-available/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and [Foundation](/blog/foundation-preview-now-available/).
```

> However, since most Android APIs are only made available through Java and Kotlin

Reviewer: LGTM @ktoso!

in the Android Runtime (ART), a version of the Java Virtual Machine (JVM)
optimized for mobile, we need to use the Java Native Interface (JNI) and write
bindings both to call Swift from Java and go the other way. That is where the
swift-java project's `jextract` tool and its [new support for generating such
JNI bindings for you](/blog/gsoc-2025-showcase-swift-java/) comes in. Please
watch its author Mads Odgaard's [Server-Side Swift Conference talk from last month](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tOH6V1IvTAc)

> and try out the tool for yourself with [this example Android app that he put together](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-android-examples/tree/main/hello-swift-java).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and try out the tool for yourself with [this example Android app he put together](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-android-examples/tree/main/hello-swift-java).
```

> ### Swift in Android app stores

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Swift on Android in production
```

> While Swift on Android may seem new, it's important to recognize that there are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While Swift on Android may seem new, it's important to recognize that Android
```

> already millions of Android devices running Swift today. Production apps with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apps running Swift has been downloaded millions of time, and used for years.
```

> substantial user bases have been shipping Swift on Android for years, proving

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are a few examples of Android apps using Swift:
```

> the viability of this approach:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- [Spark](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.readdle.spark) - A popular email client using Swift to share code between mobile iOS/Android and desktop macOS/Windows versions

> - [flowkey](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.flowkey.app) - This interactive piano learning app has been built with Swift on Android since the open-source release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [flowkey](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.flowkey.app) - An interactive piano learning app, built with Swift on Android
```

Reviewer: Updated copy to be more consistent with other list items, and removed "since the open-source release" since it was unclear what release this was referring to. If it was kept, we should clarify (which may be too lengthy?) and remove the hyphen from open source.

- [MediQuo](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.mediquo.main) - A healthcare app leveraging Swift for cross-platform development
- [Naturitas](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.naturitas.android) - An organic products marketplace running Swift in production

> These aren't experimental apps or proofs of concept—they're real businesses serving

Reviewer: A more direct way of saying this is just to assert that these are real businesses, vs starting off by stating what they are not.

real users at scale. The fact that millions of people unknowingly use Swift-powered
Android apps daily shows both the stability of Swift on Android and the
practical benefits it provides to development teams sharing code across platforms.

> ### Coming up Next

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What's next for Swift on Android
```

Swift on Android [first got started as soon as the language was open-sourced a decade ago](https://lists.swift.org/pipermail/swift-dev/Week-of-Mon-20151207/000171.html),

> but it is by no means done. [The Android project board lists areas we are working on](https://github.com/orgs/swiftlang/projects/17)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and continue to this day. [The Android project board lists areas the Android Workgroup is working on](https://github.com/orgs/swiftlang/projects/17)
```

and easy debugging is a high priority for us next. While it [mostly works in limited use now](https://github.com/swiftlang/llvm-project/issues/10831),
we need to test it more and make it easy to access. That will likely mean tying
the debugger and [Swift Language Server Protocol tool, sourcekit-lsp](/blog/gsoc-2025-showcase-code-completion/),
into editors like [Visual Studio Code](/blog/gsoc-2025-showcase-swiftly-support-in-vscode/),
Android Studio, and [CodeEdit](https://www.codeedit.app/), another issue on our board.

> ### Sharing Logic Versus Sharing UI

Reviewer: Do we have a few concise examples of the type of business logic that you'd commonly see shared between platforms? It'd be great if we could outline a few examples in one paragraph, before mentioning cross-platform GUIs in a second paragraph.

> ### Sharing Logic Versus Sharing UI

Author: Again disagree with the heading change, but good point on the business logic example, will add that.

> ### Sharing Logic Versus Sharing UI

Author: Added a clause on the value of sharing code across platforms but kept the heading, which describes this section well. Added some code in a different section, though may be too much code now. :wink:

> ### Sharing Logic Versus Sharing UI

Author: Removed the mention of working with GUI devs in the latest commit

A common concern is that we do not provide a cross-platform GUI toolkit. As we
write in [our draft vision document](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/807b844be42db582e434d1667fc907ae7a7a8775/visions/android.md),
the Android workgroup has no plans to create such a GUI toolkit, but will instead
curate a list of cross-platform UI tools. See [our recent post in the Swift forums](https://forums.swift.org/t/swift-gui-toolkits-for-android/83337)
listing a handful of popular and in-progress options.

> ### Diving in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Getting involved
```

> Finally, we intend to bring you interviews and information from those using Swift

Author: Got rid of this

> on Android already, as pioneering companies like [Readdle](https://readdle.com/blog/swift-for-android-our-experience-and-tools)

Author: Changed this to path-breaker instead

> on Android already, as pioneering companies like [Readdle](https://readdle.com/blog/swift-for-android-our-experience-and-tools)

Author: Changed this to "founding contributors" in the latest commit

and [Flowkey](https://medium.com/@ephemer/why-we-put-an-app-in-the-android-play-store-using-swift-96ac87c88dfc)
have written about using Swift on Android for the last decade. The Left Bit's Pierluigi Cifani
[wrote about their experiences recently](https://forums.swift.org/t/thoughts-on-swift-for-android/80961),
gave [a great talk at NSSpain 2025 a couple months ago](https://youtu.be/EIGl6GOo210),
and was [interviewed by Swift Toolkit last month](https://www.swifttoolkit.dev/posts/dc-pier).

> Swift on Android has been a community effort for the last decade, snowballing

Author: Prefer the real-world term

> from that initial patch to many businesses and developers making their livelihood

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from an initial patch to a community of contributors and the Swift project's [Android Workgroup](https://www.swift.org/android-workgroup/).
```

> with it today. [Try out the preview SDK snapshots](/documentation/articles/swift-sdk-for-android-getting-started.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Try out the preview SDK snapshots](/documentation/articles/swift-sdk-for-android-getting-started.html)
```
